---
layout: post
title: "Kata (#0) - Setup"
categories: [plt]
tags: [plt]
series: kata
---

Let's learn how to implement a self-hosting system programming language from scratch. This series will cover the design (including documentation, standardization, etc.), as well as the practical implementation. The first part will just be defining some terms and getting a project set up.

<!--more-->

I will be calling my language [Kata](https://github.com/ChemicalDevelopment/Kata), but you should of course think of your own name. And, feel free to make slight adjustments if you are following along -- I'll try and explain how you could change the syntax, semantics, or adding other features. Feel free to contact me if you have any problems, preferably [creating an issue on the GitHub repo](https://github.com/ChemicalDevelopment/Kata/issues).

## Creating A Language

Creating a language is a big undertaking, but not so big that you can't do it alone. To follow this series, you should be proficient in some programming language (I'll be using `C`), but the concepts covered are general and can be implemented in your language of choice. By the end of the series, you'll be a master of another language as well (hopefully, since you created it!).

I'm writing this tutorial because most tutorials I've seen online have either been about a toy language that wouldn't be used in any real applications, or most tutorials have not covered some of the more auxiliary parts of language design (including design patterns, documentation, and standardization). So, if you've already created a language, or want a more fully featured tutorial, this is the series for you!

I'm choosing `C` as the initial implementation language, since it is very ubiquitous, and it is similar to what Kata will be like (although Kata will be more advanced). That way, once I implement the compiler in C, I can basically translate the code from C to Kata without a huge paradigm shift. If you're using a higher level language like Python, then you'll have to completely rewrite the compiler in the language itself, without all of the nice memory management of Python that you'll have initially. However, you can definitely do this tutorial in Python, it's just a personal preference.

### Purpose

When creating a language, you should have a well defined purpose or use case for the language. If you're just doing it for educational purposes, that is a fine purpose, but you should still think of actual use cases of your language. For example, if its just a subset of C, then it probably doesn't need to be a language -- since C already exists. 

Kata's purpose is to be a general purpose language with support for templates, operator overloading, and a cross platform standard API that can be used to create portable applications. It is far more advanced than C due to it having somewhat automatic memory management, operator overloading. Additionally, the syntax is quite different. It seeks to provide a more well-thought-out version of C++, and the Standard Template Library. I also want to include things like proper Unicode support built in from the start.

I'll be honest: I really really dislike C++. Everything about it, from the way it is too backwards compatible with C, to the never ending standards updates (which are not portable across compilers, since it takes 10+ years for most compilers to adopt newer standards), and the general compilation system being too C-like, it is a slow, clunky, and inelegant language. And, elegance is a great reason to create a programming language. With that being said, I didn't just write this to rip on C++, so we'll move on from that.

Going forward, we need to realize that most features in C++/Rust/other system programming language existed for a reason, and we need to make sure we fulfill those reasons in order to be a successful system language ourself. Otherwise, there is a big risk that no one will want to use our language because it doesn't do what they need. I advise that you think about your language (if you want it to be used by other people) and consider the use case and purpose. Once you've got that, follow along.

Of course, if you're just doing this for educational purposes, you can follow along and copy me anyway. You'll definitely learn something about language design, and learning is always a good thing!



## Setting Up

I'm hosting my progress on [my GitHub](https://github.com/ChemicalDevelopment/Kata), which you can view all the source code on, and build for yourself. 

My directory structure for the project is as follows:

```bash
./
├── ckc
│   └── Makefile
├── docs           
│   └── Makefile
└── README.md
```

`ckc` will be the directory of the initial implementation of the compiler, written in `C`. 

`docs` will be for documenting our language and standard library


## `docs` - Documentation

Documenting our language will be important for users who wish to write compliant programs which can be ported across CPUs, arcitectures, operating systems, and even compilers (think if someone else wrote a Kata compiler... we'd want to know existing programs could be compiled by both). We'll be using [Texinfo](https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/), which is the official format for GNU projects. I like Texinfo because it can output to HTML (single monolithic page, or a directory structure), PDF, DVI, and more without changing any of the input. This will make it easy to release PDFs as well as link the same material as an HTML page on your blog or docs site.


Here's what I started with:

### `kata.texi`

```
\input texinfo
@set VERSION 0.0.1-rc1
@set UPDATED 2020-10-20
@settitle Kata

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2020 ChemicalDevelopment.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.

@end copying

@documentdescription
Official documentation of the Kata programming language
@end documentdescription

@finalout
@setchapternewpage on

@node The Kata Programming Language
@ifnottex
@top The Kata Programming Language
@end ifnottex

@titlepage
@title The Kata Programming Language
@subtitle System programming language
@subtitle Version: @value{VERSION}
@subtitle Updated: @value{UPDATED}
@author Cade Brown @email{cade@@cade.site}
@c @author Other Name @email{a@@b.c}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnothtml
@contents
@end ifnothtml

@menu
* Introduction::       Rationale, goals, and target audience.
* Index::              Complete index.
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Kata is a system programming language meant to be both extensible and portable across architectures and operating systems.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

```

(I posted this as a good 'Hello World' that you can use for any project -- use Texinfo, it's so easy!)

### `makefile`

```make
# makefile - builds Kata documentation

MAKEINFO       ?= makeinfo

src_TEXI       := kata.texi

out_PDF        := kata.pdf
out_HTML_MONO  := kata.html
out_HTML_DIR   := kata


out_ALL        := $(out_PDF) $(out_HTML_MONO) $(out_HTML_DIR)

default: all

clean:
	rm -rf $(wildcard $(out_ALL) *.aux *.cp *.cps *.index *.log *.toc *.info)

all: $(out_ALL)

.PHONY: default clean all

$(out_PDF): $(src_TEXI)
	$(MAKEINFO) --pdf $^ -o $@

$(out_HTML_MONO): $(src_TEXI)
	$(MAKEINFO) --no-split --html $^ -o $@

$(out_HTML_DIR): $(src_TEXI)
	$(MAKEINFO) --html $^ -o $@

```

From here, you can use [texi commands](https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/manual/texinfo/html_node/Command-List.html) in the content body.

To build, first `cd docs`, and then run `make kata.html`. This will build a monolithic single page documentation (currently just an intro) and store it. The problem with this method is that you have to re-run `make kata.html` every time you change it. If you're on Debian/Ubuntu, you can `sudo apt install inotify-tools`, and run: `while inotifywait -e close_write kata.texi; do make kata.html; done`. This will automatically re-run the command every time you save the `kata.texi` file.

Then, you can open that HTML file directly in the browser. For me, the URL is `file:///home/cade/projects/Kata/docs/kata.html`, but that will depend on your structure. Try dragging and dropping it on a new tab (NOTE: using the full directory structure, this method may not work since pages link to other pages. 

Also, try `make kata.pdf`. The output should already be looking professional (albeit empty -- we'll populate it throughout the series).

## Compiler Structure

We need to decide how programs and libraries will work in our language. This includes how files should be organized, as well as how individual files should be compiled, and how they should be linked together. It also includes how libraries and binaries can be exported and included in other projects, and distributed.


This decision may change as the series goes along, but for now I'm just going to focus on running a single program in memory. We'll get to this next post, in which we craft the reference compiler. This will be a simplified version of the full compiler (which we'll write in Kata itself) that only runs files in memory.


## Program Structure

The grammar/syntax of Kata may evolve as the series goes along; I'll post updates of the [EBNF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form#:~:text=In%20computer%20science%2C%20extended%20Backus,as%20a%20computer%20programming%20language.) alongside the tutorial. Here's the current goal for Kata:

```
progam         = (import | def_struct | def_enum | def_func | mod* moredecl ';')*

import         = 'import' dotname ';'
def_interface  = 'interface' NAME ('[' Tpar (',' Tpar)* ']')? ('implements' type (',' type)*)? '{' (def_func)* '}'
def_struct     = 'struct' NAME ('[' Tpar (',' Tpar)* ']')? ('extends' type)? ('implements' type (',' type)*)? '{' (def_struct | def_enum | def_func | mod* moredecl ';')* '}'
def_enum       = 'enum' NAME '{' NAME '=' expr (',' NAME '=' expr)* ','? '}'
def_func       = mod* NAME ('[' Tpar (',' Tpar)* ']')? '(' decl? (',' decl)* ')' (':' type)? '{' stmt* '}'

stmt           = '{' stmt* '}' | stmt_if | stmt_while | stmt_dowhile | stmt_for | stmt_foreach | stmt_trycatch | 'return' expr ';' | 'throw' expr ';' | 'break' ';' | continue ';' | decl ';' | expr ';'
stmt_if        = 'if' '(' expr ')' stmt ('else' stmt)?
stmt_while     = 'while' '(' expr ')' stmt ('else' stmt)?
stmt_dowhile   = 'do' stmt 'while' '(' expr ')'
stmt_for       = 'for' '(' ( (moredecl | expr)? ';' expr? ';' expr? ')' stmt
stmt_foreach   = 'foreach' '(' type? NAME ':' expr ')' stmt
stmt_trycatch  = 'try' stmt ('catch' '(' type? NAME ')' stmt)+ ('finally' stmt)?

stmt_asm       = 'asm' STRING '{' ('.'? NAME (',' expr)+ ';' )* '}'

decl           = type NAME ('=' expr)?
moredecl       = decl (',' NAME ('=' expr)?)*
type           = '&' type | type '[' args ']' | 'typeof' E7 | dotname

mod            = 'static' | 'const'
dotname        = NAME ('.' NAME)*
args           = expr? (',' expr)*
Tpar           = ('type' | type) name ('=' expr)

assign         = dotname | '*' expr | expr '[' args ']'

expr           = E0
E0             = assign ('=' | '<<=' | '>>=' | '|=' | '&=' | '^=' | '+=' | '-=' | '*=' | '/=' | '%=') E0 | E1
E1             = E2 (('||' | '&&' | '??') E2)*
E2             = E3 (('<' | '<=' | '>' | '>=' | '==' | '!=') E3)*
E3             = E4 (('|' | '&' | '^') E4)*
E4             = E5 (('<<' | '>>') E5)*
E5             = E6 (('+' | '-') E6)*
E6             = E7 (('*' | '/' | '%') E7)*
E7             = ('++' | '--' | '!' | '&' | '*' | '~' | '-' | 'sizeof' | 'typeof') E7 | E8
E8             = E9 ('.' NAME)* ('++' | '--')*
E9             = ('(' expr ')' | atom) ('(' args ')' | '[' args ']')*

atom           = INT | FLOAT | STRING | NAME
INT            = ? integer literal ?
FLOAT          = ? floating point literal ?
STRING         = ? string literal ?
NAME           = ? identifier ?
```

Whitespace between tokens are ignored, as are comments, which are either `// ... (newline)`, or `/* ... */`

Essentially, the way to read this is that each non-empty line is called a rule, and tell what makes up a particular component (a string is said to 'match' a rule if that rule describes the tokens that make up the string; `abc` matches the `NAME`, and `abc.def` matches the `dotname` rule). 

Within a rule, `()` are groups, `A | B` means either `A` or `B`, `A*` means `A` repeated any number (including zero) of times, `A?` means `A` is optional. Characters within `''` are literals that must be matched exactly, and rules that have `? ... ?` are just described, because their actual implementation may be too difficult to describe (for example, with escape codes).


Let's walk through a few of these

```
progam         = (import | def_struct | def_enum | def_func | mod* moredecl ';')*
```

Since this is the first line of the grammar, the entire file must adhere to this rule. If there are extra characters that come before or after the valid match, it is rejected as a syntax error.

This line says that a `program` consists of zero-or-more imports, structure definitions, enum definitions, function definitions, or modified declarations

```
def_func       = mod* NAME '(' decl? (',' decl)* ')' (':' type)? '{' stmt* '}'
```

A function definition is zero-or-more modifiers, then a valid identifier, then '(', function parameters, ')', an optional ':' and return type, then a list of statements enclosed in '{}'

```
decl           = type NAME ('=' expr)?
```

A variable declaration requires a type and identifier and may optionally also include an assignment.

```
type           = '&' type | NAME
```

A type identifier may be either an `&` and then a type (this denotes a pointer/reference type), or a valid identifier. Examples: `int`, `&int`, `&&char`

This EBNF is pretty complex; we'll explain and implement it in steps and add rules as we go

Here are some elements we'd like to have:

### Literals

Numeric literals can be written as a number of digits (like `123`), or as base 16 (`0xFF`), base 8 (`0o777`), or base 2 (`0b1101101`).

There can also be floating point literals which include an optional `.` followed by digits, and an exponent with `e`. So, `1000000.0 == 1e6`

String literals can be created with `"..."`, and allow escape codes (like `"\n"` for a newline, etc)


### Expressions

Expressions can use operators (which have precedences), and parenthesis for grouping. You can use `()` right after a value for a function call, and `[]` for a subscript operation.


### Types

There will be a number of builtin types (like `int`, `size`, `char`, `float`, and so on), but there will also be pointer and reference types. A pointer is a an address of a value (or, may be `null` to signal a value), (written in `C` as `Type*`), and you can have a pointer to a pointer. In Kata, a pointer type is written like `&Type`. A reference is an address type, but it acts like the value itself, and cannot be `null`. In Kata, a reference type is written like `@Type`, and you cannot have a reference to a reference.

There will be user definable types as well (called `struct` types), and they will be declared like:

```
struct Name {
	/* body */
}
```

The `body` may contain function definitions, member declarations


There will be user definable `enum` types, which are just an alias to `int` -- they are defined like so:

```
enum Name {
	/* body */
}
```

The only legal parts of a union are `NAME = VAL` pairs, and `VAL` must be a constant expression.

#### Inheritance

Kata will support single inheritance, so you may write:

```
struct Name extends OtherName {
	/* 'Name' now contains all symbols defined in 'OtherName' */
}
```

It also supports interfaces, which are defined like:

```
interface IName {
	/* Only function definitions are defined here */
}
```


```
struct Name implements IName {
	/* Name can implement the functions declared in 'IName' */
}
```




### Templates

Templates are abstract types, which cannot be 

Templates types can be created by adding `[...]` after the name of a structure. For example:

```
struct Name[type A, type B] {
	/* body, you can reference 'A' and 'B' */
}
```

It's important to note that a template is not an actual type; so typing `Name x;` is not a valid declaration (unless `A` and `B` have defaults), you must do `Name[A, B] x;`



### Declarations

In many scopes (function, type, global, etc.), we would like to declare variables of a type. This is done in a similar way to `C`:

```
Type Variable;
```

And may optionally have a value:

```
Type Variable = Value;
```

And may also have multiple declarations within the single one:

```
Type Variable = Value, OtherVariable = OtherValue;
```


### Function Definition

A function will be defined in Kata like so:

```
<mods>
<name>(<args>) : <returntype> {
	<body>
}
```

Where:

|--|--|
|`<mods>`|Combination of `static`, `const`, or other modifiers we may have|
|`<name>`|Valid identifier for the name of the function (i.e. `main`)|
|`<args>`|Comma seperated list of declarations, such as `int argc, &&char argv`|
|`<returntype>`|Type that the function returns (optional -- the default is `void`)|
|`<body>`|List of statements that define what the function already does|

So, the `main` function (which will be ran when the program starts, just like in C/C++/other languages) will be declared like so:

```
main(int argc, &&char argv) : int {
	/* body */
}
```


## `ckc` - First Compiler

The first compiler implementation, which we'll write in C, we'll call `ckc` for `C Kata Compiler`. We'll set up the structure in this blog but actually start with the heavy lifting next time.

The `ckc/` will hold a makefile as well as the source for the initial compiler. This won't be a full implementation of Kata; it'll only be enough to compile the compiler we write in Kata, and THAT compiler will (eventually) be the full implementation.


### `ckc/makefile`

```make
# makefile - builds the C Kata compiler

# - Compiler Flags -

FPIC           ?= -c -fPIC
CFLAGS         += -I.

# - Files -

src_C          := $(wildcard *.c)
src_H          := $(wildcard *.h)

src_O          := $(patsubst %.c,%.o,$(src_C))

# - Rules -

ckc: $(src_O)
	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) $(LDFLAGS) $^ -o $@

%.o: %.c $(src_H)
	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) $(LDFLAGS) $(FPIC) $< -o $@

clean: FORCE
	rm -f $(wildcard $(src_O) ckc)

.PHONY: clean FORCE

```


This will be familiar to anyone who's written their own C/C++ projects. If you aren't familiar with the above, see [A Simple Makefile Tutorial](https://www.cs.colby.edu/maxwell/courses/tutorials/maketutor/). Essentially, this file describes compiling all of the `.c` source files into `.o` object files, then combining them to create the `ckc` binary.

### `ckc/kc.h`

```c
/* kc.h - 'Kata' compiler header, for the default C implementation
 *
 * @author:    Cade Brown <cade@cade.site>
 */

#pragma once
#ifndef KC_H__
#define KC_H__

/* std includes */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdint.h>
#include <stddef.h>

#include <string.h>
#include <assert.h>


/* generic hash type (should be an unsigned type) */
typedef unsigned int hash_t;


/* TODO: implement functionality */

#endif /* KC_H__ */
```

This is the header file -- it will be included by all the source files, and merely defines the data types and system libraries we are using. Right now, it's pretty empty, but in the future this will be where we define our types, functions, and other components of our compiler.


### `ckc/main.c`

```c
/* main.c - main entry point for the compiler
 *
 * @author:    Cade Brown <cade@cade.site>
 */
#include <kc.h>

int main(int argc, char** argv) {
    if (argc != 1 + 1) {
        fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s [file]\n", argv[0]);
        return 1;
    }
    char* file = argv[1];

    fprintf(stderr, "compiling kata source in '%s'\n", file);
}

```

This defines the actual entry point; we ensure that the user called the utility correctly, and if not, we print a usage message and exit.

Building and running this example is done in the shell:

```bash
$ make
cc -I. -c -fPIC main.c -o main.o
cc -I. main.o -o ckc
$ ./ckc
usage: ./ckc [file]
$ ./ckc file
compiling kata source in 'file'
```

Obviously, it doesn't do anything yet, but we'll solve that in the next post


